We have to go and rearrange them.
Because it's got to have all these other people.
Have you got another one?
Yes. We're okay. I've got
a... Okay.
You're just upset with the colors. I'm not.
Good afternoon.
Good afternoon. How you going?
We've seen you before.
Okay.
Haven't we?
Yes.
I think so. Mm.
Many, yeah. Anyway, Max, we've got five minutes with you.
Okay.
Thank you. Thank you, Chair. Thank you,
members of the
panel. I welcome the law change.
I want to begin with my argument by saying that justice must be
seen. If justice can be shown
that it has been done, and that delayed justice is justice
denied.
Does civil litigation appear to limit offenders'
culpability in the eyes of the public?
In that it is seen as not as
equivalent to justice served. I offer the view that in order for the
dimension of justice to be served, there must be visibility.
I argue that New Zealand has a social practice amongst
law enforcers to fraud, which is
their readiness to referring people onto the avenues of civil
litigation as remedy.
I argue that civil litigation appears to limit people's
culpability.
I am not certain
that people see civil litigation as having the same
visibility as justice is being seen.
So it is for this view of the public interest, I wish to champion criminal
charges over civil litigation as a mechanism for
trying cases, as a necessity for deterrence.
With a collusion involved two or more people,
investigators may insist on obtaining a global view of the
offending and the participants,
a pattern, before they decide to pursue a case.
I argue that this is unnecessary.
Instead, I would want fines to be given for crime,
direct evidence
which are visible and can be seen, again, where there is hard
evidence. While not exhaustive,
offenses include wiping a computer,
inventory loading, bogus emails from lawyers and suppliers, unauthorized
transactions for discretionary spending, parallel
companies.
Circumstantial evidence features more prominently in other sorts of
crimes, I admit. While there may be collusion between
two or more suspects that an investigator may want to look
at, I wonder if it's realistic to place it as a
burden for something a person who comes to a police
station seeking help, that they should be expected to
provide this. The insistence of providing a pattern of
offending, this benchmark is too high.
Nothing in law requires a frequency of offending as a
necessity condition to pursue crime.
Fining people for these breaches as criminal charges
establishes the culpability of the offender.
The other thing is to provide fines for accountants who fail in
their duty of care to report offending under
mandatory disclosure. There have been high-profile
cases of fraud involving accountants in New Zealand.
The accountant's duty of care should extend to
reporting suspicious behavior, and I argue that the end of
justice should prevail over the
aims of the client. The accountant has breached
the duty to the administration of justice in not
reporting the fraud. Incidences of
sanctions are rare, and for this reason, they should be fined
too. I would also want to stress the need for independence of
accountants in order to discourage account and a
client from an illegal course, and certainly not condone or
assist. I argue my case that justice delayed
is
justice
delayed, that the legality of offending is a holy one which
deserves remedy inside of criminal law, and
to refer cases to be resolved in civil remedies is to block
victims of fraud from receiving justice.
Very good.
Thank you. Right. Members.
Thanks for that. Thank you.
So,
and more generally, because it's a little bit different from your submission.
You support the
changes to the-
Yes
... to the bill?
Yes.
Because of the reasons you outlined in your-
Yes
... submission there.
Yes.
Yeah. Do you see any
issues with the bill? Or are you more at a
higher level of-
No, I think that, yeah, I feel as though that
our
jurisdiction is a lot more weaker than other
places. Like in
Queensland, they've really got really hard
laws on things like offenders seen in, what was
it?
Bottom of the harbor tax avoidance.
Right. Mm.
So, I think we
could be seen as soft for fraudsters.
But a bigger part of
my written submission and my supplement was that $3
million mule case in the Bay of Plenty, which
I think-
... is quite significant. And I
feel as though there's not a predictability nationally between
in
different regions. I
have friends in the Bay of Plenty,
and when they've had
cases and they've gone to the police, and
it hasn't been satisfactory.
Right.
Satisfactory. Yeah.
Yeah.
All right, Max. Hey, thank you for coming again, and always nice meeting up
in person. I really appreciate that on behalf of the committee.
Thank you.
Of course.
Right. Now, have we got
Mr.
Dylan Mordaunt?
He's not here yet. We weren't able to call him. He's based in Australia.
Oh, he's calling in from Aussie.
And he's due in two minutes, isn't he?
5:50. 4:50.
4:50. 4:50.
Due in six minutes. We can
spin on him.
Can we or spin?
Go with this then. To suspend for five?
Do you want to suspend for- No, business three. Yeah. Okay.
Well, let's suspend for five. Yeah. Okay. All right.
Have you had any comments?